Hey, YouTube. Hello, everyone out there. Megan, Mike, happy to have you on the podcast.
It's going to be great to talk about things with you. So let's go ahead and kick this off.
Welcome. We're happy to be here.
Yeah. Yeah. It's great to have you here. I'm such a fan of space and just it's amazing to think about our place in the universe.
and where we are and so much of that has been revealed
really through telescopes, right?
From the very beginning of like,
oh look, the sun doesn't rotate around us,
how weird to, you know, the universe is expanding
with what Hubble did or just all the amazing discoveries
we've had, the exoplanets and whatnot.
So super cool.
And if we're gonna mix Python into that,
that is definitely an interesting thing to do.
So I'm happy to have you both here to talk about that.
- Yeah, we're happy to join you.
- Yeah, it's great.
- Yeah, for sure.
So let's just really quickly before we get into the topics,
maybe start with just a little bit of a story
on your background.
Now, Megan, how'd you get into programming
and find your way over to Python?
- Yeah, so programming.
I started young and it was mostly because I was jealous
of some of the other kids, this is the early 80s,
that had access to the new Atari systems,
new ColecoVisions and I didn't really have that.
I wanted to be able to play games and do those types of things.
As it turned out, my dad had just bought one of these new computers in Osborne,
which is one of the early personal laptop.
It might be the first laptop,
a very heavy laptop though.
>> Probably not as good battery life as today either, I would suspect.
>> I don't think, yeah, there's no battery life.
>> Yeah.
and it only had a small green screen
and you couldn't display graphics,
but I was determined I was gonna play a game on it.
So I found this programming book in Basic
for microprocessors and followed along,
learned what it was doing to create responses on the screen
and ended up making things like Mad Libs
and Choose Your Own Adventure and ASCII art
and stuff like that.
And just learning what the commands I was doing really did.
So that got me into programming and I kind of just did that on and off.
It was really strange, even though I was always working with computers, when I hit college,
nobody ever suggested to me that I should do computer science, that I should be a programmer
or that I should do this other thing.
So I went along with some of my other interests, which were astronomy and physics and music.
But even in astronomy, software and software engineering and working with computers is
a must.
- Yeah.
- And after I started working at the Institute
for a few years, Python started becoming
a much more used language and something
that could provide real benefit
for the scientific community.
And so I started learning that
and that's how I got into Python.
- Wow, fantastic.
Yeah, the days of just holding up a telescope
and looking at stuff, those are pretty long gone, right?
- Yeah, they're pretty long gone.
In fact, most astronomers don't even get
to go to the telescope on the ground anymore.
There's a lot of remote observing.
It was starting to switch over when I was in college.
It's much, much heavier now.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
What a bummer, those are amazing places.
- Yeah.
- Mike, how about you?
Sorry, you can go ahead and finish your thought.
- No, go ahead.
- All right, Mike, how about you?
How'd you get into programming Python?
- Yeah, for me, I dabbed a toe in it in high school
with a Fortran class.
We actually got bussed over to another school
to run our deck of cards through someone else's computer.
>> Oh, my god.
That's another level right there.
>> I'm that ancient.
And then in college, a few classes here and there.
And then when I got out, one of the only skills I had
was programming.
So I had a math degree and so started with programming
in Fortran at the start, but then got into other languages
and eventually got to Space Telescope in 1996
and have been here ever since.
I started with Python about 2002.
There was a software conference called ADAS,
A-D-A-S-S, Astronomy, Data Analysis, and Software Systems.
And we put one on, the institute that I work at,
put one on in 2002 in Baltimore.
And Python was really a highlight of that conference.
It was really coming into its own.
And that just kind of broke the door down for everyone
at the institute.
Behind one of our founders, Perry Greenfield,
who works at the institute, is very, very big
in the Python community.
And he kind of led the way, and we all followed.
Right on.
Well, it's certainly an amazing language for data science
and for working with things like these telescopes and whatnot.
So it has this special blend of approachability,
but you can actually do quite a bit of real stuff with it.
Whereas so many other languages are either approachable
or you can do real stuff, but not both.
Yeah.
It also cuts down a lot on development time and lines
of code and stuff like that, which
makes it a lot easier to maintain larger systems that
can handle the Python.
Yeah, absolutely.
I was impressed with the clarity.
When you looked at a piece of Python code,
you stripped away all the syntax and all the language
decorations, and it was just--
the design was staring at you.
So to me, it's the simplicity of it that's the best feature.
Yeah, absolutely.
So let's start our conversation maybe
by talking about where you two work at the Space Telescope
Science Institute. Just sounds so amazing.
That is a cool name.
Yeah. So what do you do there? Megan, you wanna go first?
Yeah, sure. So right now, I'm the technical lead for the data
management system, that's going to be accepting and processing
and distributing all of the data that we're getting from one of
the next big telescopes, the Nancy Gace Roman Space
telescope. So my day-to-day job is making sure that all that is designed and
functioning and data is flowing through and the software we're gonna write for
scientists to do analysis of that data you know will run and is appropriate and
accessible. That's kind of my that's my day-to-day. Before that I worked heavily
on post pipeline scientific analysis processing software so visualization
tools, data analysis tools, things that really the astronomy community uses after we've constructed
the data for them from the telescope. Okay. Tell us just a little bit about the data
story of this. There must be a lot of data coming off of these newer telescopes with their
huge resolution.
- Yeah, so there is a lot of data coming down.
The detectors onboard JWST are 2000 pixels by 2000 pixels.
And there's a lot of them and there's a lot of instruments.
And so we have to be able to manage
all of that data stream coming through.
And I might let Mike talk a little bit here
since he works heavily on the upside of the house,
helping with managing that data.
- All right, Mike, yeah, take it away.
And what's your role?
at STSI.
My role is--
Yeah, it is.
A team lead for the data processing team,
also a scrum lead.
We use the Agile approach to software development.
And I'm focused completely on JWST science data processing
and Guider data processing.
The data comes down to us through the Deep Space
Network of NASA and hits the ground
and comes up to us at Baltimore.
We have the control center right in the building,
They're actually talking to the observatory
right through our main building.
And then the data feeds down to our processing systems.
And that's where my code comes in,
making sure we got all the data,
completeness checking,
sending the data through the pipelines
and the processing systems with the right processing recipe
so that we get the right kind of data products out
and getting them into our archive.
The Institute has a well-known archive for astronomy data.
And that's where a lot of astronomers come to do research
and find data sets that they can use in their science.
- Fantastic.
A lot of that data is public, right?
- It is, it is very much so.
There's a proprietary period for some kinds of data
so that scientists have a chance
to write their special papers that they proposed for.
But a lot of data is maybe immediately public
and then other data becomes public after a bit of a while.
- Interesting, so you might write a proposal
for time on web or one of the telescopes.
And then if that's approved, then you get your time,
then you get your data.
And of course it would make sense
to just instantly publish that
because that's part of your work, right?
- Yeah, and so this is actually,
you know, pieces of the entire process.
The whole world of astronomers is allowed to propose
to use these telescopes, so Hubble and JWST.
And there's a telescope review process that happens
where they submit their suggestions.
This is what I wanna do.
This is how awesome the data is gonna be.
This is what I'm gonna provide to the community
and the discoveries I think I'll make.
And a team of experts, you know, agrees
and decides how much time everybody is gonna get.
And we have a lot of tools on what you might think of
as the front end of this process to help them figure out,
you know, how long do the observations have to be
if I'm looking through these filters and these wavelengths,
what kind of errors am I gonna get?
What's the exposure time?
How should I most effectively use the telescope time
to get the science out?
Because telescope time is always, it's gold, right?
- Right, absolutely.
It's one and only one of these things, right?
- Yeah. - This particular one.
I didn't really think about that you,
for asking different types of questions,
there was a different amount of time that you might need.
Obviously, if you're going to stare at space for a certain amount of time, it's going to take that
time. But I hadn't really thought about the different processing pipelines might require
more data to get the right level of accuracy and stuff. That's pretty interesting.
Yeah. So it really does depend on what you want to get out of it. When you observe in different
wavelengths, you have to look at those things for a long enough amount of time to collect the light,
to get statistical certainty, to get detections. But then you have to play that against the fact
that as you look longer and deeper, your field might get more crowded because you'll be able
to pick up light from more distant objects. You may have things that are called cosmic rays,
extra energy that gets added into the detector that you don't want, that's not from your object,
that's just messing up your data. And the pipelines take these things into account.
we look for things that are, oh, this is not coming from the object. This is coming from
something in space that we don't want to detect right now, or something that is being imparted
by the instrument onto the data, and we want to remove the instrumental signature. So that's what
a lot of the processing software tries to look at. Yeah, fantastic. Mike, anything you want to
add to that? Just one other kind of data is time-dependent data. You may need to look at
objects over time, either calendar time or even many hours or many days, to see variability.
And that's a big part of some of the datasets is they just stretch on for time so that you
can look for planetary transits or flares or various phenomena that might vary over
time.
Yeah.
How interesting.
One of the goals that Webb is trying to solve is to detect exoplanets, right?
For those, you've got to watch multiple years
of whatever that planet's year orbital time is, right?
If it takes it three months to go around,
you've got to watch the star
for several three-month periods, right?
- Well, and even in the case that you don't know
that the stars have planets, you want to find new ones.
You need to go back and look at that star multiple times
so that you can detect that difference
in the light that it's emitting.
So when the planet goes across the star,
some light is going to be dimmed by that.
Or if you're looking at spectroscopy,
you might see the starlight passing
through the atmosphere of the planet itself.
Yeah, fantastic.
All right, I want to dive into the Python side,
given that that's what most people are interested in.
But before we get into that, let's just
talk real briefly about what are some of the science missions
and how is this different than Hubble?
It looks really different than Hubble, right?
It's this bunch of hexagon gold plates
that unfold instead of being a tube like a traditional,
even the space telescope like Hubble is.
It's got a tennis court-sized shield around it and stuff.
So whoever wants to jump in, tell us a bit about what
is the goal and the science of Webb?
You made it a science side better.
Why don't you go ahead?
[LAUGHTER]
I don't know.
You can pick up.
I'll do some, and you pick in.
Yeah, so Webb is really the largest space telescope.
It does have segmented mirrors, 18 of them,
that can be adjusted to make sure that the focus is good.
It's something like six meters across.
It's really big.
It's 6 and 1/2 meters across the mirror.
I think it's something like 21 feet in diameter,
something like that.
One of the things that makes it different from Hubble
is not only the size of the mirror
and the size of the telescope, but Hubble orbits the Earth.
And JWST is demonstrably not orbiting the Earth.
It's not very close at all.
It's out at the second Lagrangian point, which
is a more stable point that things orbiting in the Earth's
sun system tend to collect at.
And it's not even at that point.
It's orbiting around that point and facing away from the Earth.
And so one of the things that's really important for Webb
is that it stays cool, that its instruments stay cool.
And that's why it has this big sun shield.
And so the cold side of the telescope
is where we have all of our instrument packages.
And that allows it to pick up this infrared wavelength
of light, which is sensitive to heat.
And it allows it to do the science
that we need to do to look at dust and look through dust
and look all the way back to the very earliest time
just after the Big Bang when light was starting to be visible,
to collect and start to form objects and stuff like that.
So the design of the telescope is very much
to enable the science that's possible with it.
And Hubble uses visible light?
Is that the difference?
So Hubble has a range.
Hubble actually has instrumentation
that looks at UV, visible, and then near infrared.
So it has a little bit of everything.
JWST also looks at near-infrared,
but it goes much further out into the mid-infrared as well.
And I guess that goes through dust clouds and things
like that better?
It can.
So you can switch between the different wavelengths
of light depending on what types of phenomena you want to see.
But also, because we want to look very far back in time,
what happens and what enables us to do that
is the redshifting of the light.
So because after the Big Bang and the expansion
of the universe, the light gets stretched
by the expansion of space, to look back in time,
you want to look at the light that
is of that similar wavelength that's been stretched.
So that's why we're looking in the infrared wavelengths.
OK, interesting.
Yeah, it comes from visible down to infrared
as it shifts back in time?
If it was blue-- no, it goes--
It's moving away, so it's stretching out
redder and redder and redder.
So generally, in redshift, if it's coming towards you,
it gets blue, or the wavelengths get shorter.
As it's going away, the wavelengths get longer.
Yeah, got it.
So what are some of the missions?
I talked about the--
we talked about the exoplanet a bit.
Exoplanets, galaxy history, evolution.
Star formation.
Star formation, looking at the chemical composition
of the galaxies.
and of stars.
So it really uses this combination
of spectroscopy, imaging, and coronagraphy.
And coronagraphy is excellent for exoplanets
because it allows you to basically put
a stopper in front of the star and look
for really, really dim things that are very close to it.
Yeah.
Because solar system objects as well, and even things out
in the comet work cloud, and things that we just can't see.
We don't have anything that can get out there
in the infrared like this telescope will be able to.
Yeah, that's going to be super exciting.
Hubble really changed people's view of the world, right?
Seeing all the-- like the sky full of galaxies and stuff
like that.
What do you think we're going to learn?
I mean, maybe it's too hard to predict.
But what do you think is going to be surprising?
Or what types of things do you think
we're going to learn and change our perspective with this?
I guess what I hear from most of the scientists
is they know they're going to find out things that they never
even thought of, because that's what Hubble brought.
And when you put something up that's this groundbreaking,
that it goes so far beyond what we can currently do,
there's going to be just surprises that are just
going to blow people's minds, because they did not think
that things were even possible.
Hubble basically was involved in finding
the acceleration of the universe, expansion.
And that wasn't even conceived of.
So things that are groundbreaking and just never
thought of, the astronomers are open to those.
And they're waiting for the data to come in
to start to get to look.
Yeah, fantastic.
All right.
Speaking of data, let's start talking about that side, Mike.
You said the data comes in over the deep space network?
Is that--
Yeah, NASA's deep space network.
Yeah, so maybe tell us about the kind of data coming in
and how that all works.
Sure.
So the Deep Space Network is what we use
to talk to the observatory.
We get a couple contacts-- well, eventually,
when it's in steady state operations,
we'll get a couple contacts a day where it'll
download the data to us.
Right now, we're in fairly steady contact.
There are three ground stations around the world--
in Australia, California, and Spain--
that kind of give nearly continuous coverage.
And so they're getting the data down.
It comes down through the beams.
>> What kind of bandwidth can you get on this network?
>> Oh, that I don't know.
I don't have this maybe certain idea.
>> Yeah, these networks are big antennas.
And we share this with other missions,
with other things that are in space that need to communicate.
>> Mars rovers and what?
>> Like Mars rovers and stuff.
And they typically operate in the KA and S band regions.
>> Yeah, cool.
All right, I'm sorry, I didn't mean to derail you, Mike.
Go ahead.
>> No, all good.
So the data comes down to the Deep Space Network facilities.
It gets transferred up to the Institute,
which is in Baltimore, to our flight ops team, the flight
observation system.
They get the data in several forms.
They get binary files right off the flight data recorders.
There's a recorder that captures both science data
from the science instruments and engineering data that's
monitoring the state of the telescope temperatures
and pressures and various things.
Right, of course.
Because there's all that data--
are going, it's focused, right? It's still running, things like that.
Absolutely. Yeah, they have to, health and safety of the observatory and then the science as well.
So we get those binary files that come up, we get auxiliary files that are processed on the ground,
we take the engineering data that comes down, extract out some really key parameters that are
necessary for the data processing and put those in special files and send those over to our data
processing system, along with kind of a summary of what the
telescope was doing since we last contacted. So we know,
observe these things, and these, these observations worked,
these had problems, gives us kind of a status of things. And
the other kind of data that we absolutely need is called
ephemeris data, it tells us exactly where the telescope was
at any given time, which can be important for some types of
science. Yeah, so all that data flows our way in files, we use
Python tasks to pull a common disk area that files are
dumped in and pick them up and transfer them
to our processing system.
So the telescopes receive the data.
That gets processed probably at the--
not the telescope, the--
Ground station.
They receive it.
Yeah.
And then that gets sent probably over the internet,
gets dropped into some local file or some cloud storage.
You're watching that, and then Python picks it up from there?
That's right.
We pick it up.
We segregate what kind of data each is,
send it on for various kinds of processing.
We put a lot of those data files right
as they come in the door in our archive.
So if we need to get them back out to look at them later,
we can.
We use a system for distributing the processing
called HT Condor.
It's made by the University of Wisconsin.
And it lets us distribute the processing
over a big network of machines.
This was developed even before the cloud came into being.
Now the cloud's just part of it.
So we use that system to span out
the data processing of these various types of files.
And we have a lot of data completeness checking
that we do in Python, where we got to register what came in,
whether we got all the packets.
The data can come in different orders.
It can be split up different ways in the recorder.
And you have to do a bunch of data accounting
before you can send it down the pipeline for processing,
because otherwise you'll have holes in it,
and the processing won't give you the best product.
So we do all that pre-data accounting analysis.
And when we've got something that's got all the parts,
we send it on down the pipeline
with a particular processing recipe
that tells the pipeline
to apply these exact calibration recipes,
make these exact kinds of files
and get them into our archive
for the scientists to retrieve and do science with.
- Oh, that's really interesting.
So you're doing some of the error checks
and all that kind of data cleaning stuff for them
before they have to pick it up.
- Well, we also need to check to make sure
that there wasn't an error in the transmission of the data,
that we got everything off the telescope
that we thought we were gonna get,
whether things need to be retransmitted.
And we're recording all the information
about the instrumentation surrounding the detectors,
what the temperatures are on the telescope,
and saving that and associating it with the data
so that when scientists are looking at it,
they can make correlations
with the different things that they see.
- Oh, nice.
We've got Teddy out in the audience has a question
that's pretty related to that.
How do you manage potential disruption in data transfer,
like if you lose the connection?
Do you all have to worry about that, or is it handled--
like below?
We do.
It does happen.
It is handled upstream from us.
The Deep Space Network has that capability,
and our flight ops team has to get them sometimes
to retransmit the data.
If we got it on the ground, but we just
didn't get it to our institute, we
can get it resent from another ground station.
But if it really didn't make it all the way down
from the observatory, then they've
got to go back on the next contact pass
and get it to retransmit to the ground.
Yeah, so there must be some kind of protocol exchange
over the deep space network that sort of takes care of that
for you.
Yep, yep.
And as Megan said, that's a shared resource.
So if they happen to be talking to the Mars Rover
or they happen to be talking to something else,
we've got to get in line with everyone else
till we get our turn again.
Sure.
Also related to that is, what's the latency
between the first piece of data sent
and the first one received.
I mean, we are at great distances
talking about the speed of,
limited by the speed of light, right?
So it's not milliseconds, I'm sure.
- Megan, do you recall what the travel time to LT was?
I don't recall, honestly.
- I don't know, probably by the time we get it,
we're talking minutes, some range of minutes,
but I haven't calculated it recently.
- Yeah, yeah, very interesting.
I mean, when we talk about data, you
may take pictures with your camera,
with a CCD in your camera, and you'll
see that picture immediately.
And it's a square, and it looks like the scene that you got.
But when Mike was talking about, we're
waiting for the pieces of the data to come,
that square gets chopped up on board the telescope
and sent to us in little tiny pieces,
and we have to reconstruct it.
Yeah.
The other part of that analogy is, if you hold your camera up
and you take a picture of the sky, it's just a picture.
We add all kinds of what we call metadata,
supplementary data to that image that tells where it was pointed
in the sky, what filters were in use on the observatory,
what astronomer asked for this data, what data grouping is it
part of.
They do groupings in what they call proposals.
And so we have all this extra data
that we put into the files so that someone coming
in to our archive who didn't propose the data
can still extract it and get some understanding of what
was done, how that piece of observation was set up.
- Sure, of course, because if somebody says,
here's a directory full of large JPEGs.
- Exactly. - It takes seconds now, right?
- They're beautiful and they're almost useless.
Yeah, with alpha metadata,
they're almost useless for science.
- Yeah, absolutely.
They would still make a good coffee table book though,
probably.
- Once they were cleaned up of the cosmic rays
and all those things that Megan talked about.
- And once you combine all the multiple filter images,
you get the pretty colors.
- Yeah, I bet.
Yeah, those are amazing.
Sam Paria asks, "What's the max onboard storage in case the data, if there's an extended period where you can't get to it? How long will this thing run before it's just hard drive fills up?"
Meg, do you remember the capacity for the recorder?
I know because I have Roman in my head right now, so I don't remember the JWST capacity.
but they take that into account and that's how they've scheduled our contacts and downlinks with
the Deep Space Network so that we can get the data off in a reasonable time and it's not affecting
you know scheduling of new observations. So they've done a lot of work and a lot of the work
that we've done with Hubble in the last 30 years because we do scheduling and data processing on
Hubble has allowed us to understand how to best optimize those types of things. Yeah very
Very interesting.
You must have a lot of experience from Hubble
because that's a lot of data as well.
I was wondering how much computing
happens on the telescope versus how much is it just
a receptor and a transmitter?
There is a little bit that happens on board JDMST,
especially in the instruments.
Meg probably knows more of the details of some
of the infrared instruments.
But they do image differencing and summations.
Infrared detectors build up their signal over time.
And rather than send all those bits to the ground,
there are some on-board calculations
that are done so that they send a bit less to the ground
than they actually collected.
Yeah.
So one of the things that's different about IR instruments
than UViz CCDs is that we don't--
every time-- there's no shutter in the IR.
Every time we want to know what the detector is collecting,
we kind of ask it really nicely.
What's the voltage at this pixel?
Then we ask it again, and we ask it a whole bunch more times.
And that's the data that we send down.
And knowing how that signal is accumulating in the pixel
without removing the signal from the pixel
allows us to do cool things with IR data that
allow us to reject the cosmic rays that
may have come during the course of the exposure and stuff
like that.
Nice.
Do you have to do stabilization?
I know the thing is probably pretty stable out there,
but it's also looking really far away.
- Stabilization, yeah, it is looking far away
and it is mostly stable.
Where it is orbiting around L2
is not a completely stable orbit.
And so they do have to do station keeping,
which I believe fires rockets
to make sure that it's in the correct orbit.
- And one of the big pieces of news that was really great
was ESA, the European Space Agency,
who launched this did an excellent job
of getting it right on target.
So it didn't have to correct much,
which means it has extra fuel to run longer to do that.
- Exactly.
They did an amazing job with that launch.
That was like a flawless launch.
It was really, really cool.
- Fantastic.
All right, a real-time follow-up.
We've got Adam on the audience says,
"JWST can store at least 65 gigs of science data.
"Downloads occur in two four-hour contacts per day
where each can transmit 28.6 gigs of data.
How about that?
When we reach steady state science operations,
that's probably correct.
Yeah, right now we're contacting a little more often,
because as they're going through commissioning,
they really need to interact with the observatory much more
often.
When we get steady state operations,
they'll send plans up to the observatory,
and the observatory will just tick through the plan.
It'll look at this star.
It'll throw these filters in it.
It'll turn to this galaxy, look at these filters.
It'll go look at this planet.
And it'll basically do it a program, where right now,
they're interacting much more often with the observatory.
So if you tell it to stare at this spot,
this blank, dark spot in the sky for four hours,
you don't need to check in with it as frequently,
as long as it's--
Exactly.
--even OK, right?
Yeah.
If you told it to stare at that spot and something went wrong,
the Webb telescope is smart enough
to skip ahead and go to the next thing in the schedule, where
Hubble was very ground dependent.
Everything Hubble did had to be told from the ground.
And James' T is a little bit more automated,
where it will, if it's got a problem
with something it's trying to do,
it'll just skip ahead to the next thing
and someone else will reschedule that later on.
- So I heard that there are some kind of JavaScript stuff
running actually on the telescope.
Is there any Python happening there
or is the Python story really once the data gets back here?
- There's no Python on the telescope.
There is JavaScript on the telescope.
It is a forked private version of JavaScript
from a while ago, I believe,
there was a study done to think about
what's the best way to do instrument commanding,
and that's what I believe was chosen.
Yeah. - Yeah.
Interesting.
Yeah, it's fine.
It doesn't really have numbers,
but I guess you don't need numbers for science.
- Well, so-- - So it's okay.
(both laughing)
- Well, so, I mean, when you think about the volumes of data
that are coming down from the telescope,
we're also transmitting the science pixels as integers.
They're unsigned integer arrays.
And then when we do the actual processing,
those are expanded into floating point.
And so there's expansion that happens on our end
for processing and storage and analysis.
- Yeah, cool.
Mike, you mentioned this HT Condor.
Maybe tell us a bit more about this.
Is this something that people would find generally useful
outside of telescopes?
- Absolutely.
It's a very generic product
developed by the University of Wisconsin.
Back in the day, they developed it
because they had all these computers sitting around
on people's desktops that they wanted to make use of.
People were using them for three or four hours a day
and then going off to lunch and going off to meetings
and the computers were sitting there.
And they used this system as a way to harness those cycles
to the point where if no one's sitting at a computer,
Condor could tell, it could drop a job on that computer,
run until the person comes back.
As soon as they hit a keystroke,
the job would leave that computer.
And if needed, go off and finish its work somewhere else.
So it started in that realm
and they just expanded and expanded.
- Like SETI@home or one of these sort of grid computing stories.
- Exactly. It started in that realm.
Now it can process over full universities
using all the machines at a university,
research clusters,
there are government initiatives that have grid setups.
Now the commercial clouds are involved.
They have interfaces to AWS and Microsoft Cloud
and a whole bunch of others.
So they really expanded their access.
It's highly used.
The realm that pushes it the most
are the ones that do the--
oh, Megan, what is the big science that just
came out last year?
I'm drawing a blank.
The big science that just came out?
Yeah, the detectors, where they found--
LIGO?
LIGO, thank you.
Oh, that's right.
Something about space and black holes, yeah.
The computing demands of those detectors are just--
they make JVC look like a pen,
you know, computing on your pen.
So they're really off the charts.
They need so many cores and clusters to do their computations.
And this is one of the only system,
Condor is one of the only systems around
that can get them the access to the cores they need.
It's highly used in the LIGO community.
And I think Python too is a huge part of that LIGO result.
It is. It is a lot of Python.
Yep. Condor has a full Python interface.
So you can talk Python right to Condor,
import the package and you're off and running.
>> Yeah. That's really neat.
Just pip install or conda install,
hd condor and off it goes, something like that?
>> Yeah.
>> pip install power.
>> Awesome. You mentioned that it
takes advantage of these computers
which are sitting idle.
Of course, we've got folding at home and we've got SETI at home.
those types of things, which they seem to have gone away,
which I think it's a little bit sad actually,
but there's been these things where it's like,
well, if a personal computer is sitting around idle
and we've got a bunch of them in an office
or a university or whatever, then we could use them.
That's great, right?
We also mentioned the cloud
and I guess I had never really thought about it,
but I know the cloud providers don't want this from you,
but if you will pay for a virtual machine,
there's a good chance that it's sitting there
doing 20% of what it could do.
So you could actually, if you've got 10 or 100 virtual machines
running the cloud, you could say, you know what?
Whatever extra capacity you have,
I'm going to use that for this other sort of scheduling
service.
Yeah, the good thing about astronomy
is most of it doesn't have to happen in real time.
So we can buy up the cheap cycles
where the machines are not being used on a clock
and get good deals to go off and do our reprocessing
processing that has to happen. Right, like reserved instances or something like that at AWS.
Right. HST is already doing some of their process reprocessing in the cloud. That's another point is
we get the data down from the observatories once and we process it once, put it in our archive,
and then we reprocess it again and again as the calibration algorithms improve,
as software bugs are found, and as reference data, particularly calibration reference data,
special data that's used to remove those instrumental signatures that Megan was talking
about. As all that supplemental data and algorithms improve, you rerun the data again and again and
again. And you need the computational capacity to do that while data is still coming down from
the telescope, because your archive is getting bigger all the time. So you've got a bigger
crank to turn to get everything up to the best possible product it could be.
That is pretty fascinating. I hadn't really thought about that you would have to reprocess
the data. But yeah,
It drives all our designs because we reprocess the data
tens of more times than that very first time it
hits the ground.
Sure.
What does the compute stuff look like for you all?
Are you using GPUs?
Are you using some of the NumPy, SciPy, AstroPy stack
to do this?
Those are definitely involved, yeah.
Yeah.
So GPUs, I don't think we have an excessive amount of GPUs.
probably those are more in the post-processing parts of the software.
But those other things you mentioned, most definitely,
and we actually are heavy contributors to those packages as well.
So we do a lot to provide back to the community the software that we're creating,
especially our external data analysis, post-processing analysis software,
so that it can be used by the rest of the community.
Yeah, the same a Priya asks, what can a user at home do with the data? Or do you need like
these huge clusters, compute clusters to work on them? There are no books like, so people are
out there listening, I suspect there are some astronomers who have, you know, an expertise in
this, but there's probably a lot of people are just fans of space. Yeah, I want to play with
this? So, you know, any data that's public that you can access in our archive, you can
download and you can analyze it.
You can install the science calibration software.
So the stuff that takes the data that we've already prepared for you and does further
analysis on it, does we have visualization tools you can install?
We have many different things that scientists or even non-scientists might want to play
with to look at the data.
And that's all possible.
I do that with Hubble data all the time on my laptop and my laptop just has 16 gigabytes
of RAM.
And, you know, now Hubble data is fairly small compared to the machines we were running on.
Yeah.
I bet when it first, how old is Hubble?
20 years?
30.
Yeah.
30 year old computers probably thought that data wasn't small.
So we've gone from terminal services to desktops and laptops and back to terminal services
eventually in the near future because of the size of the data.
Yeah.
Do you have like notebook servers that are running close to the data that then you can
log into and play with or what's that look like?
So we do at different levels.
Like you're talking about Jupyter notebooks, Jupyter lab, that type of thing.
So that does exist.
We've been playing around with science platforms in the cloud to give people access to not
only the software, but the data in a very easy way.
And I think JupyterLab makes that really, really effective
for the tools that we can provide to people.
- Yeah.
- But you can also run it yourself
on your own local machines.
- Sure.
As the data gets bigger and bigger,
part of the cost and latency is just transferring, right?
So if you can run your compute close to it,
you can save money by not transferring it
and all sorts of things, right?
- Exactly.
Or reading it into memory for very, very large files.
And so as a system,
the system itself needs to be very large
to process the sheer volume of data that we get
and are constantly getting and reprocessing
and storing and serving.
But for individual data pieces,
it's still very possible for people
to process it on their own.
- Sure.
Do you use things like Dask
or any of these sort of panda NumPy like things
that scale out to larger data?
- Yeah.
It depends on the tool and what the purpose is
that you're using.
- Sure. - Yeah, for sure.
Mike, got some thoughts on this before I move us along?
>> No, that's a really good summary of the picture.
I think I'm pretty sure at this point,
all the public HST data is in the Cloud.
I think it's all on AWS.
I believe you can work with it there,
especially if you've got research to do.
>> Yeah. One of the things that got my attention,
besides someone I think sending me a message,
"Hey, you should talk to the JWST folks."
Is you have over at GitHub,
you have the Space Telescope Science Institute
where you've got all kinds of various things
that people can go play with, right?
Maybe tell us a bit about some of the highlights over there.
The one that I ran across is just JWST.
- Yeah.
- Which is, it describes itself as the Python Library
for Science Observations from the JWST.
- Yeah, so this is what we call
the science calibration package for JWST.
The software that lives here is able to
do the detector calibration that we talked about
and image combination and everything else
that we need to do to create the standard products
we've agreed to create for the mission.
That's all contained in this package
and this package gets installed in our backend systems
to be run as we're processing the data
and it's ready to be processed at this level.
So this is what users would install
if you wanted to reprocess or do higher level analysis
of the JWST data for different instruments.
- You spoke about the reprocessing and the reanalyzing.
So you would install this and if you had an idea
on how to maybe do different noise reduction
or other processing.
- Exactly.
- This is what you'd do.
- Got it.
perform some base calibration to put the data in the archive
and to make it somewhat usable.
But most high-level scientists are doing their own recalibration
and they're tuning the data for what they're
trying to get out of it, especially
if they're working at the margins of noise
and other things where they really
have to work with the data to get out of it
to fit their science needs.
So a lot of this is the byproduct
of this proposal process.
Because we don't know what the science is
that's going to come through, we try
provide the best generic processing for all the data.
Right. It's pretty neat that this is just here on GitHub.
Right. You know, that's cool. Yeah, I suspect when Hubble came out, it was not like, well, here's the open source thing. And here's how you contribute back in the same way. Right. I'm sure it's aired to some degree, but the openness of science and the really the computational bits of science over on GitHub is pretty amazing.
It's a lot of fun. I think we started using GitHub when it first came out.
We were, especially during Hubble, using Subversion and even older version control systems.
CVS or something dreadful.
CVS, RCS even. Whatever we could use.
Yeah.
They were run on internal systems and managed on internal web pages.
So when GitHub came out, it was really nice to be able to share our software,
not only with astronomers in the larger community,
but with other missions that we interact with.
And to be able to talk to them about how we develop
and accept changes and improvements into the software.
- Yeah, you see right here, there's 541 issues
and 20 PRs that are open, but 3,462 that are closed.
- Yeah. - And that's pretty amazing.
- Yeah, that's, we do a lot of work.
- And JWST is a new mission now.
- Yeah, awesome.
So another thing that I ran across that looks interesting
is the WebPSF, which is a simulation tool, right?
Maybe tell people about this.
- So Web is obviously the telescope,
PSF are point spread functions.
This is the statistical pattern that light falling
on the detector from a star would make.
And you can predict what that pattern is gonna be
based on the optics that are in your telescope.
And so this piece of software takes that understanding
of the optics in the telescope
and how light gets transmitted through those optics,
including through different wavelengths
and create simulated images
of what we might be able to see.
This allows us to not only predict
how the telescope is gonna perform in different ways,
but develop our software, develop the algorithms
that we use to do pull out stars and stuff from images.
- Yeah, very neat.
I suspect that people didn't have access to the telescope
and they wanted to play around with some stuff.
Maybe they could use this.
- Yeah, they could.
There's other simulation tools that are out there
that will simulate full astronomical scenes as well.
So not just individual stars,
but galaxies and the combination of the two.
- Do you have some you can point people at?
- I think I'd have to send you a link.
- Yeah, we'll put it in the show notes.
Yeah, we'll put it in the show notes
so people can get to it.
That's great. - Let's do that.
- Yeah, awesome.
Another thing I ran across looking at all this stuff
is this place called AstroConda.
And there's a whole bunch of stuff,
just tons of libraries in here.
It looks like there's a lot of neat things,
like for example, working with the ASDF file format,
which I suspect is something that you all provide a lot of.
- Yeah.
- And so on.
- So we developed that format.
We wrote that format.
The primary interpreter is in Python.
So a little bit of astronomy history.
Astronomy for a very long time has used a file format
called FITS, Flexible Image Transport System.
It started around the time data was being saved on tapes,
on tape store.
(laughing)
- You might want to optimize two different things
It's going on tape in the SSD.
Right. And so it's been in the community a long time and a lot of community tools are based on it, accessing it.
And it was part of it was a big part of this other thing in the astronomy community called IRAF, which was a common software package.
It actually had its own virtual operating system and command line languages that did the reduction for us.
One of the things that JWST brought about is we needed to be able to handle those complex optical
path descriptions for how the light from a star you're observing gets onto the detector
and how you translate those positions back and forth. So where's the telescope pointed?
Where is this light as it's moving around? And how can I tell at this pixel what star that relates
to in the sky? And it seems very non-trivial because you've got all these different hexagonal
pieces that are independently adjustable and you've got to sort of reassemble that into
a continuous thing, right?
Well, so that's part of it.
And even larger part is the number of optics that are in that chain.
And then the optics inside each of the instruments and some of them are spectroscopic instruments
that divide light into its constituent wavelengths.
And those wavelengths have different travel paths and will fall on the detector in different
places in mathematically predictable ways, but not always simple mathematically predictable
ways. And so saving that information was really difficult in fits. And we developed this new
format that will allow us to save analytical models into the data itself, that can then be
opened up by the users and very easily used to understand the relationship between the stars and
the pixels that they are looking at and the stars in the sky. And so we started JWST with that. And
And it actually gets packaged into a FITS file.
But in later missions, we'll be using just as diff.
- Yeah, that's really neat.
So it lets you save more of just the raw data.
- It gives us a really nice way of saving information
we need to understand about the data
along with the data itself.
It also saves the binary rays.
It's actually, if you were to look at it,
the text part of the format is YAML
based on JSON schema standard.
- Yeah, fantastic.
So looking through this AstroConda thing here,
obviously there's stuff that's very focused
on astronomy like ASDF,
but there's also other cool libraries like Apters.
Right, Apters is, there's all these like little things.
So if I wanna write something to a temp file
where's my user home or stuff like that, right? You can ask questions like that.
Of this. I actually, I haven't looked at abjures, but it must be being used by one of our other
sub packages and somebody wrote it, wrote it for a good purpose. So this, this AstroCon
to site that you're looking at was, you know, this repackaging of tools that are written in Python,
often with C extensions that can be used by astronomers in the community to do what they
they need to do to look at the data, calibrate the data.
And so this AstroConda channel is a Conda channel
that allows us to organize that information
and deliver it to users who are using Conda environments.
- Nice.
- Or virtual environments.
- Yeah, you can say something like,
install this channel, everything in this channel,
and then you'll basically be able to do most of the work
that we're talking about or something like that.
- Right.
And so most of these are now available
also separately on Conda Forge and PyPy.
So often people will install from there too.
- Sure.
Yeah, so we've got, let's see,
AST eval, a safe minimalistic evaluator for Python.
That's pretty cool.
You've got mysterious ones like cube tools,
which just refuse to identify themselves.
(laughing)
- That's actually for 3D images.
So we stack things up.
- Yeah, cool.
Anyway, I'll put the link to this in the show notes
so people can look around.
It's just interesting to see all the stuff
that you were bringing together here.
You've got the STSI.
- So that's a meta package for Conda
that will install the individual things that go together.
- Yeah, of course, of course.
All right, let's see, what else did I wanna make sure
we get a chance to touch on?
So this one, this JWCS1.
- Yes, one sounds pretty interesting.
One of the challenges with the telescopes, I'm sure,
is things orbit around other things
which are orbiting around other things,
around the sun, which is around through the galaxy
and whatnot, right?
So figuring out where you're pointing
is probably pretty tricky.
Is that what this library does?
- So when I was talking about being able to understand
the light and where it is in the sky and on the detector,
This is what we're saving in the as diff file,
these GWCS representations,
generalized world coordinate system.
And that's a mouthful.
World coordinate systems are what astronomers use
to relate an undistorted scene on the sky
to what you have on the detector.
And it changes depending on what the telescope optics are.
But what GWCS provides is layered on top
of astropy modeling,
which allows you to string together mathematical models
to translate coordinates between two different systems.
And so we use this for translating perfect sky
coordinates to detector coordinates
and intermediate systems as well.
And one of the benefits to that is sometimes
there are effects that happen in the detector that
should be corrected at different stages along the way,
and you can insert those corrections
in this pipeline of models.
It makes sense to correct in this coordinate system,
potentially rather than at different levels,
something like that.
I see.
Yeah, pretty fascinating.
It sounds complicated.
- It's cool.
- Yeah, it is definitely cool.
- It's built on a lot of other open source code
that is useful for more things than just astronomy, right?
Modeling is useful for everything in science.
Fitting is useful for everything.
So it's cool that we can help provide tools like that
to the community.
- Yeah, for sure.
What's the machine learning story
around the telescopes and the data?
Are you all doing anything with that?
Any AI stuff?
If you want to take it.
- So I'll talk about,
you can pipe up Mike for the HST stuff if you want.
- Hi, I'm not familiar with that aspect.
- Oh, no?
So yeah, obviously we have data science groups
at the Institute that are doing a lot of machine learning
Machine learning can be applied to things like the catalogs of objects that have, you know,
astronomers scrutinize details about what these things are that are confirmed that can be used to build up information about unknown images, right?
Machine learning for processing, we've started doing some of that related to the HST processing in order to optimize scheduling, time,
spreading the data out, understanding, you know, if there are certain metadata keywords,
like what Mike was talking about before, that we know will affect the processing in certain ways,
we can detect that early and make up for it. Interesting. How much of a challenge
is an optimization problem of who gets time when? So this person wants to look here and do this,
then that person is going to look over there. But if there's somebody that wants to look in the
middle, maybe you could save some fuel by turning a partway, letting them do their job, like skip
ahead in line and then keep moving. Yeah, it's a great point. It's not only fuel, it's you don't
want to move your mechanisms more often than you have to. So you don't want to flip the filter
wheel three positions left, 10 positions right, when you could have done that in a more economic
way and save the wear and tear on your system. So there's a lot of optimization that goes into the
planning and scheduling system. And of course, with astronomy, there's visibility. You've got
certain targets are not visible at all times of the year, just depending on where they are relative
to the sun. Right, you can't turn around and look right past the sun because it'll...
JVC especially cannot look back. So even in the software there are defined regions of avoidance
that we are not allowed to move the telescope. And so we have planning and scheduling systems
that know what these things are, that know the range of places that this telescope proposal
approval community has decided to point the telescope. And it figures out what is the most
optimal way to organize those observations to get them to the astronomers as fast as possible.
>> Interesting. All right. Well, towards the end of our time together, what
Other things are you doing with Python you think people find interesting that maybe I haven't asked you about yet?
Or did I cover everything
We covered a lot of ground
There's a lot of nuts and bolts that the data processing side has to do, you know, we interface with a lot of databases
So we need database interface packages that talk to microsoft sql server and sqlite database files
And things like that as megan said we do a lot of
parsing, so we're JSON parsing and XML parsing. And so we're all those packages come into play.
And then there's good old fashioned bit busting, where we've got to get into the telemetry binary
files and bust out the sections of bits that are the data from the wrappers that come down.
Figure it out. Yeah, exactly. So yeah, various packages across the Python scheme help us. And
there are a lot of external community packages that help us as well. And then there's also all
all the documentation that has to be done.
We're heavy users, especially for our externally
delivered packages of Sphinx and code documentation.
We have a lot of our stuff on read the docs,
a lot of our infrastructure for testing.
- I just had the folks on from Myst and
have to do a better search to get something
other than a video game, but the Myst project,
do you still do all your stuff in restructured text
Are you doing any of the markdown things with mist?
I'm not doing anything with mist. I have done a lot of restructured tests and pure
latex. And Sphinx helps with those two things, too. A lot of the scientists themselves just
write pure latex. They just write on their papers in pure latex.
The symbols for it are so crazy. It's so many like, but what comes out of it is really remarkable.
So, I mean, it's really pretty. I remember being introduced to it even as an undergrad.
in the 90s and was like, this is, this actually looks much cooler than word.
But when I was in grad school, I did some of my homework in LaTeX, but I haven't touched it for
many, many years. It's practical. Yeah. They still, a lot of the journals and a lot of the
astronomy conferences expect you to turn in posters and papers written in LaTeX that conform
to their standards. Yeah, absolutely. All right. One final question I want to ask you about,
And Megan, you said you were working on this is the Nancy Grace Roman space telescope.
So we just like we haven't even really got the web telescope fully online and,
and you're working on this in this next one. Give us the elevator pitch for this so people can be
excited. And what's the timeframe? So Nancy Grace Roman is really cool.
It is also going to go out to L2 where JWST is sitting in part because it's an infrared
telescope as well. It's focused in near infrared. So more similar.
And the web one might get lonely, so it needs a friend.
Yeah. I mean, there are some other telescopes out there too, but yes, we need more friends.
And so it is about, the mirror is about the same size as Hubble, but its optical prescription
gives it a much wider field of view. So a hundred times the field of view of Hubble.
And it has way more detectors and pixels, about 300 megapixels. So there's 18 detectors,
and every time we take a picture, all those detectors are going off.
So there's also a lot more data volume coming down that we get to process.
But a lot of cool things we can do.
We can, you know, reach the level of the Hubble Deep Field very fast.
We're going to cover about 50 times more space
in the first five years of this mission than Hubble has in 30 years.
So it's going to provide a lot of cool things for the community.
It's also a survey telescope.
So a lot of its time is dedicated to some surveys that want to be done to support the community
looking for exoplanets and they expect to find several thousand exoplanets during the first
five years of the mission, investigating dark energy and the expansion of the universe and
the physics behind that. And so and other things that I'm sure astronomers will come up with.
One of the cool things is that it'll be launched to be compatible and collaborative with JWST
and LSST, one of the large ground-based missions, and Euclid, one of the European-based missions.
So it's really cool to be in this era of astronomy where the missions can really be, you know,
working together to make cool new discoveries and take data. That's fantastic. I haven't even
thought of them working together. All right, quick question from Julian audience. We'll wrap it up.
How many of the experiments are providing data
through the pipelines immediately
versus that priority, like private period
that we talked about?
So some of that is up to the scientists.
The scientists can choose when they submit their proposal
to make the data public immediately.
As soon as we get it, we process it, it's in the archive,
and it's there.
That's very, very fast.
One of the standards for Hubble is there's typically a year
that the scientists have to look at the data exclusively
with their group and do the science they want to do
and then it'll be released.
But I think that there are also cases of longer than a year.
- Yeah.
- And was it Roman going to...
- Roman has no proprietary period.
The data will all be public immediately
and we'll be serving data in the cloud and on-prem.
- Wow.
So no dragging your feet if you're trying
to make a discovery and want to get credit for it.
- No, no.
- Yeah, no scooping other people either.
You gotta be on the ball.
- That's right.
Okay, so I think we gotta leave it there,
but it's really fascinating to see the ways
that Python and the data science tools
are connecting us with space and these discoveries.
So thanks for sharing those.
- Yeah, thanks for having us.
- You're quite welcome.
- Yeah, now before you get out of here,
you gotta answer the final two questions,
but there's a couple of you,
so just maybe lightning round.
So if you're gonna write some Python code,
And what editor would you use these days?
I'm old school. I'm a VI editor.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah, I use VI, especially if I'm logging into servers and stuff,
or I'm doing something quick.
If I'm doing a more complicated development, I usually use Sublime.
- Okay, fantastic. - But in the past, I've used PyCharm and other ones.
Sure.
And how about a notable PyPI package?
Some library you came across recently and you're like,
"Oh, this is so cool. People should know about this."
I highly recommend the Condor package.
If you've got to do any kind of distributed data processing,
you should really know what Condor is providing.
So I highly recommend exploring that.
Fantastic.
Megan?
So I'll go a little bit to--
I know we've talked about this.
I was so excited to see PyLab come out,
because it provides us--
not PyLab, I'm sorry, JupyterLab.
It provides us with so many opportunities
to get the data and the analysis to our scientists
in the easiest way possible.
allows them flexibility to work on it with their colleagues and produce really good science.
But from the other side, I actually saw recently this package called Silly,
which just produces random bits of data you can use for tests with all sorts of
entertaining things. Yeah, Silly. I think you can even have it emit Chuck Norris quotes and stuff
like that, which can make it, you know, "Oh no, that's pie jokes." That was the other one I found
- Oh, I love pie jokes.
- You can have it.
- Yes.
(laughing)
- I love Chuck Norris, yeah.
He only makes programming better.
- He does.
(laughing)
Interesting, so silly is like faker, but silly.
It says.
- That's silly.
(laughing)
- I love it, I love it.
All right, cool.
Well, thank you both for being here.
If people wanna get started with some of the JWST data
or some of the libraries, you know, what would you say?
- Go to our archive.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
It's archive.stsei.edu.
And as soon as the GenMST data is coming through
that they can look at, the public available data
will be there.
Yeah.
And there's tools already there.
You can see the images, what they look like.
You can play with them a little bit.
So it's not--
You don't even have to know astronomy.
They have both the FITS formats that Megan
was talking about from scientists,
and they have plain old JPEG preview images for folks
to just browse and get a quick look at the sky.
OK, fantastic.
All right.
Well, Megan and Mike, thank you so much for being here.
It's been great to chat JWST and space in general with you.
Yeah, thank you so much.
It was fun.
Take care.
Yeah.
You bet.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]